Initial Research - P Sinclair
================
Patrick Sinclair

My initial idea for the final project was to local at trends within the
coffee industry, perhaps on the economic effects of Specialty coffee on
developing coffee-producing nations or to examine what changing trends
can tell us about the US economy - does the presence of a hip coffee
shop give a good indication of gentrification within an area; do
changing consumption habits dictate where businesses invest or does
business investment dicate consumption habit? (The latter question may
need some data from Australia - Starbucks’ initial entry in the market
was quickly left [high and
dry](https://www.cnbc.com/2018/07/20/starbucks-australia-coffee-failure.html)
by the Australian coffee consumers)

[The Effects of Fair Trade Certification: Evidence from Coffee Producers
in Costa
Rica](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w24260/w24260.pdf),a
2019 paper by Raluea Dragusana and Nathan Nunn, examines the impact of
Fair Trade certifcation on coffee producers and households. Their
purpose is to determine whether acquiring a Fair Trade certification
acutally has a positive on income for producers and households. They use
panel data over a 16 year time period that is amalgamated from the
Instituto del Cafe de Costa Rica (a regulatory body overseeing coffee
producers) and the Encuesta Hogares de Propositos Multiples (EHPM)
survey. The EHPM suvery is an annual survey of households however it
does not follow the same houseoholds, so the authors resort to using the
same cantons - an area of designated administration in Costa Rica (there
are 81 cantons across the country).

The authors use linear and non-regressions, incorporating exponentials
on Age variables, to examine both mill and household trends. They
incorporate interactions with global Arabica coffee prices and the price
gap of holding a certification to properly gauge the impact of
certification for mills.

The issue I face is that the dataset is tiny - the paper follows only
332 mills, giving approximately 2100 observations. In papers cited by
the authors, all of the data sets followed \< 500 respondents.

One way around this may be to look at the broader market trends so I can
utilize ever changing market prices as observations. The authors of
[Volatile Coffee Prices: COVID-19 and Market
Fundamentals](http://www.ico.org/news/coffee-break-series-2e.pdf)
examine the fluctuations in the market price of coffee as it responded
to the developing outbreak of COVID-19. The authors use the “ICO
Composite Indicator Price, a weighted average of all major coffee
origins and types” to determine the trends in the world coffee market.
From their examination of the variation in spot and futures prices of
coffee, the authors review the potential impacts on the supply and
demand sides of the coffee industry. An interesting line of inquiry may
be to compare larger data-sets of price variation with smaller data-sets
of consumer behavior and see how if changes in market prices affect
consumer behaviors.

### Bibliography

Dragusana, Raluca and Nunn, Nathan, (2019). “The Effects of Fair Trade
Certification: Evidence from Coffee Producers in Costa Rica”,
<https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w24260/w24260.pdf>

International Coffee Organization (04/2020), “Coffee Market Report”
<http://www.ico.org/news/cmr-0420-e.pdf>

Hernandez, Manuel A., Pandolph, Rebecca, Sänger, Christoph and Vos, Rob
(05/2020), “Volatile Coffee Prices: COVID-19 and Market Fundamentals”,
<http://www.ico.org/news/coffee-break-series-2e.pdf>

Turner, Ashley (2018). “Why there are almost no Starbucks in Australia”,
<https://www.cnbc.com/2018/07/20/starbucks-australia-coffee-failure.html>
